# Next Technical Steering Committee Meeting Agenda

- Date: 2020-05-04
- Time: 19:00 UTC

Please file pull requests to add, or discuss items to add, to the agenda.

## Items to discuss

- Future of laminas-cache

  As already stated on [discourse](https://discourse.laminas.dev/t/rfc-laminas-cache-satellite-packages/1543), we should move adapters and plugins into satellite projects.

  - What are the general thoughts of the TSC members about that plan?
  - How long should we wait for feedback from the community?
    - I've seen the [MVC RFC](https://discourse.laminas.dev/t/rfc-zend-mvc-4-design-changes/447) which is around for almost 2,5 years.  
